Cyberethics, as a field of study, can be understood as a branch of applied ethics. 
Applied ethics, as opposed to theoretical ethics, examines practical ethical issues. 
It does so by analyzing those issues from the vantage point of one or more ethical 
theories. Whereas
1.4 CyberethicsasaBranchofAppliedEthics:ThreeDistinctPerspectives b 15
ethical theory is concerned with establishing logically coherent and consistent 
criteria in the form of standards and rules for evaluating moral problems, the 
principal aim of applied ethics is to analyze specific moral problems themselves 
through the application of ethical theory. As such, those working in fields of 
applied ethics, or practical ethics, are not inclined to debate some of the finer 
points of individual ethical theories. Instead, their interest in ethical theory is 
primarily with how one or more theories can be successfully applied to the analysis 
of specific moral problems that they happen to be investigating.
For an example of a practical ethics issue involving cybertechnology, consider again 
the original Napster controversy. Recall that at the heart of this dispute is the 
question: should proprietary information, in a digital format known as MP3 files, be 
allowed to be exchanged freely over the Internet? Those advocating the free exchange 
of MP3 files could appeal to one or more ethical theories to support their position. 
For example, they might appeal to utilitarianism, an ethical theory that is based on 
the principle that our policies and laws should be such that they produce the 
greatest good (happiness) for the greatest number of people. A utilitarian might 
argue that MP3 files should be distributed freely over the Internet because the 
consequences of allowing such a practice would make the majority of users happy and 
would thus contribute to the greatest good for the greatest number of persons 
affected.
Others might argue that allowing proprietary material to be exchanged freely over 
the Internet would violate the rights of those who created, and who legally own, the 
material. Proponents of this view could appeal to a nonutilitarian principle or 
theory that is grounded in the notion of respecting the rights of individuals. 
According to this view, an important consideration for an ethical policy is that it 
protects the rights of individuals—in this case, the rights of those who legally own 
the proprietary material in question—irrespective of the happiness that might or 
might not result for the majority of Internet users.
Notice that in our analysis of the dispute over the exchange of MP3 files on the 
Internet (in the Napster case), the application of two different ethical theories 
yielded two very different answers to the question of which policy or course of 
action ought to be adopted. Sometimes, however, the application of different ethical 
theories to a particular problem will yield similar solutions. We will examine in 
detail some standard ethical theories, including utilitarianism, in Chapter 2. Our 
main concern in this textbook is with applied, or practical, ethics issues, and not 
with ethical theory per se. Wherever appropriate, however, ethical theory will be 
used to inform our analysis of moral issues involving cybertechnology.
Understanding cyberethics as a field of applied ethics that examines moral issues 
pertaining to cybertechnology is an important first step. But much more needs to be 
said about the perspectives that interdisciplinary researchers bring to their 
analysis of the issues that make up this relatively new field. Most scholars and 
professionals conducting research in this field of applied ethics have proceeded 
from one of three different perspectives— professional ethics, philosophical ethics, 
or sociological/descriptive ethics.13 Gaining a clearer understanding of what is 
meant by each perspective is useful at this point.

